In this video, we are
going to learn about
two Excel functions that can
help us convert data in Excel.
Last week we helped Zara
sort out the amount field,
so they are all showing
as valid numbers.
What Zara needs to do
now is add those all
up so she can compare the
total to the other report.
So clicking "V1"
we're going to type
equals sum and open our brackets.
I'm going to click on "Q2" and
"Control + Shift + Down Arrow"
to select them all,
and then I'm going to just press
"Tab" so I jump back
up to the top row.
Small problem, we've
got the answer zero
Now, why is that happening?
Well, the first clue is,
if you have a look
at these numbers,
they're all aligning to the left,
and that is often a hint
that there is a problem.
Numbers in Excel automatically
align to the right.
What's happened here is,
although it contains
valid numbers,
we got to them by
using text functions.
This data is being
stored as text,
and this can be quite
a common problem with
data that comes out
of external systems.
Before we can perform
any arithmetic operations
on these values,
we need to actually convert
them to proper numbers,
and the function
that will help us do
this is the VALUE function.
Now let's have a look
at how it works.
I'm going to just click
into "V2" and type
"=va" and tab
to select value,
and when I click on
the "Amount" and press
"Enter" you'll see it's
actually aligning to the right.
It's behaving like a number.
I'm going to undo that
and we're now going to
apply the VALUE function to
our existing calculation.
I'm going to double-click
into "Q2," and
there's already a fairly
large calculation there.
We want to take the result of
that whole calculation
and apply a value.
So we're going to click
between the equals and
the substitute, type "va",
press Tab, don't forget
to close your
brackets at the end,
press Enter and hey presto,
you've got a number, and
when I double-click
to copy that down,
all of our data has converted.
So that's the problem
sorted with getting
texts to numbers.
Now I should just point out
that if you try to apply
a VALUE function to a cell that
contained a
non-numeric character,
you would actually
get a Value Error.
So you will need to
make sure you've only
got numeric characters
inside that cell.
What we're going to look at next
is solving the opposite problem.
That's where you have a number or
a date and you want to
convert it to text,
and that's the problem Zara has
encountered in the other report.
So let's just click
into the next tab,
and just like she did
in the previous sheet,
she needs to get
the invoice month.
If you have a look
at the data here,
it's been stored
as a proper date,
and so we can't use
our LEFT, RIGHT
or MID functions that we learned
about last week to extract it.
The function we are going to need
here is the TEXT function.
The TEXT function is almost like
the opposite of the
VALUE function.
It takes a valid date or
a valid number and
converts it to text.
Let's have a look
at how it works.
So clicking in "K5," I'm
going to type "=te"
and Tab to select text.
The first thing it wants is
the value we want to convert.
So I'm going to click on my
Invoice Date and type a comma.
The next thing it needs to know
is what do we actually
want to get back,
do we want month?
Do we want year?
Well, we tell Excel this
by giving it a code.
I'm going to start by
opening my double quotes,
because it's going
to be a text code,
and we use D to represent days,
M for months, and Y for years.
Now a single D will return
me a day without a leading zero
So this case will give me a two,
but for this case it
will give me a 16.
If I put two Ds,
that would give me a
02 or over here 16,
three Ds will actually give me
the day of the week with just
the first three characters,
and four Ds will give me
the whole day of the week.
So let's just have a
look at how that works.
I'm going to press Enter
and you can see
that was a Monday.
Well, that's not
actually what we want.
We want the month and for
the month we're going to
use M. So I'm going
to type three Ms,
which will give me the month,
abbreviated to three characters,
and when I press
Enter, there we go,
and we'll copy that down.
So the two functions we've
seen are the VALUE function,
which would take numeric
characters stored as
text and convert them to numbers,
and the TEXT function,
which will take
numbers or dates and
convert them to a text
format of your choosing.
So two very useful functions for
converting your data
into the form you need.